lifecycle hooks (#13)
ykakarap/kubecon-na-22-capi-lab: lifecycle-hooks.md

  - [Clean up](#clean-up)
<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Running the Extension

Firstly we will need a simple extension server that needs to run and be able to receive cluster lifecycle events. For this, lets create a deployment in the management cluster that will act as our extension server.

```bash
kubectl apply -f yamls/extension/test-extension-deployment.yaml
```

Note that the YAML also contains all necessary resources like Service, Certificates, etc that will make this extension server reachable from within the management cluster.

Let's verify that the extension server is running:

```bash
kubectl get deployments -n test-extension-system
```

The output should resemble:

```bash
NAME                     READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
test-extension-manager   1/1     1            1           30s
```

## Register the Extension

Now that we have a running extension server let's register it with Cluster API. This will inform Cluster API to call the extension server during key workload cluster lifecycle events.

> Let's first look at how the registration looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's first look at how the registration looks:
```
nit

```yaml
apiVersion: runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: ExtensionConfig
metadata:
  name: printer-extension                      // Unique Registration Name
  annotations:
    runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io/inject-ca-from-secret: test-extension-system/test-extension-webhook-service-cert
spec:
  clientConfig:                                // Information to contact the extension server
    service:                                   // Reference to a service running in the management cluster
      name: test-extension-webhook-service
      namespace: test-extension-system
```

Let's register the extension using:

```bash
kubectl apply -f yamls/extension/test-extension-config.yaml
```

Let us now verify that the extension is properly registered and reachable:

```bash
kubectl get extensionconfig printer-extension -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions}'
```

The output should resemble:

```bash
[{"lastTransitionTime":"2022-10-12T04:55:44Z","status":"True","type":"Discovered"}]
```

> **Optional**  

> > If you are curious, take a look at `.status.handlers` of the `printer-extension` resource by doing `kubectl get extensionconfig printer-extension -o jsonpath='{.status.handlers}'`. This lists down all the lifecycle events the extension server would like to receive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you are curious, take a look at `.status.handlers` of the `printer-extension` resource by doing `kubectl get extensionconfig printer-extension -o jsonpath='{.status.handlers}'`. This lists down all the lifecycle events the extension server supports.
```

## Extension in Action

> Now that we have the extension server running and registered with Cluster API let's see it in action. The extension server is configured to receive the following events (non-exhaustive list):

Reviewer: Could this be 1) an exhaustive list and 2) contain a little bit of detail about when each hook is called on what it could be used for.

Author: I am fine with adding a full list a small description of each hook. 

I am not so sure about going into any further details (including examples) as that might be too much information and deviates from the hands-on a little but. What do you think about adding a link to the proposal instead for folks who might be interested in more details?

Reviewer: Yeah - +1 to name plus a single sentence on when the hook is called.

Reviewer 2: Seems fixed

- BeforeClusterCreate
- AfterControlPlaneInitialized
- BeforeClusterDelete

### Create a new workload Cluster

In this section we will create a new workload cluster and see that the extension server receives these events and logs them.  
In a new terminal tab let's start watching the logs of the extension server:

```bash

> kubectl logs -n test-extension-system deployments/test-extension-manager -f

Reviewer: Maybe offer the non-follow logs command as an option here (after creating the cluster)

Reviewer 2: Is done

```

Go back to the previous tab and create a new `docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks` workload cluster.
```bash
kubectl apply -f yamls/clusters/docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks.yaml
```

In the extension server you should see logs similar to:

```bash
...... other log lines
I1014 02:50:50.860237       1 handlers.go:47] "BeforeClusterCreate is called"
I1014 02:50:50.873831       1 handlers.go:165] "BeforeClusterCreate response is Success. retry: 0"
I1014 02:51:38.782571       1 handlers.go:80] "AfterControlPlaneInitialized is called"
```

> Note that the workload cluster could take a few minutes to fully come up. Each of the log lines above would take a few minutes in between to show up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the workload cluster could take a few minutes to fully come up and each of the log lines above could take a few minutes to appear.
```

### Delete the Cluster

In this section we will delete the `docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks` cluster and observe that the extension server is receiving and logging the event.

> If you are feeling a adventurous try the [(Optional) Block Cluster deletion using Extension Server](#optional-block-cluster-deletion-using-extension-server) to block the deleting of a cluster using extension.

To delete the cluster run:

```bash
kubectl delete cluster docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks
```

In the extension server you should see logs similar to:

```bash
I1014 03:06:52.393668       1 handlers.go:131] "BeforeClusterDelete is called"
I1014 03:06:52.408447       1 handlers.go:165] "BeforeClusterDelete response is Success. retry: 0"
```

### (Optional) Block Cluster deletion using Extension Server

> Till now we used a simple extension server that only logs the lifecycle events. What if we wanted to do more with the lifecycle hooks? In this section we will see how lifecycle hooks can be used to do more than just log events. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far we used a simple extension server that only logs the lifecycle events. What if we wanted to do more with the lifecycle hooks? In this section we will see how lifecycle hooks can be used to do more than just log events. 
```

Let's change our extension server's behavior to send a "blocking response" when it receives a `BeforeClusterDelete` event.

> The extension server is pre-configured to always send a "allow response". Let's change this so that the extension server now send a "blocking response" to the `BeforeClusterDelete` event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension server is pre-configured to always send a "allow response". Let's change this so that the extension server now sends a "blocking response" to the `BeforeClusterDelete` event.
```

```bash
kubectl patch configmap docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks-test-extension-hookresponses --patch-file yamls/extension/block-patch.yaml
```

> Now, lets delete the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's delete the cluster.
```

```bash
kubectl delete cluster docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks
```

You should observe that the delete operation is blocked and in the extension server logs you should observe the following logs:

```
...... other log lines
I1014 03:25:41.039429       1 handlers.go:131] "BeforeClusterDelete is called"
I1014 03:25:41.046028       1 handlers.go:165] "BeforeClusterDelete response is Success. retry: 5"
.....
```

> Observe the `retry: 5` in the logs. The extension server is effectively telling the cluster to block the delete operation and re-check after 5 seconds. The management cluster calls the extension server every ~5 seconds till the extension send back a `retry: 0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Observe the `retry: 5` in the logs. The extension server is effectively telling the cluster to block the delete operation and re-check after 5 seconds. The management cluster calls the extension server every ~5 seconds till the extension sends back a `retry: 0`.
```

> **Note:** DO NOT kill the terminal that is blocked in the `kubectl delete cluster docker-cluster-lifecycle-hooks` run.

Reviewer: Why not? I don't think this has too much of an impact on performance. I think I'd prefer if this section was more clearly runnable in a single terminal window - all the directions to swtich and open terminals are confusing to me. I think it would be better to write it in an agnostic way and let users dictate their own flow.

Reviewer 2: I think we don't have to stay stuck in kubectl delete cluster, right? The request initially sets the deletionTimestamp and after that it's just a watch. So we can just stop the cmd?  (I think there might also be a cmd where it just doesn't wait, while it doesn't change anything on the server-side, maybe --wait=false)

Reviewer 2: But yeah maybe making this a single-terminal thing is easier for folks

Author: Agree that single-terminal would be a better flow. Updated the instruction so that the user can follow the entire doc in a single terminal.

> **Table of Contents**
> - [Using Cluster Lifecycle Hooks](#using-cluster-lifecycle-hooks)
>   - [Running the Extension](#running-the-extension)
>   - [Register the Extension](#register-the-extension)
>   - [Extension in Action](#extension-in-action)
> 
> # Using Cluster Lifecycle Hooks
> 
> This guide covers how one can use Cluster API's RuntimeSDK feature to hook into key lifecycle events of the Cluster. 
> In this section we will create a simple `test-extension` that receives key lifecycle events of the cluster and prints them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Using Cluster Lifecycle Hooks

This guide covers how one can use Cluster API's RuntimeSDK feature to hook into key lifecycle events of the Cluster.
In this section we will create a simple `test-extension` that receives key lifecycle events of the cluster and prints them.

<!-- table of contens generated via: https://github.com/thlorenz/doctoc -->
<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Using Cluster Lifecycle Hooks](#using-cluster-lifecycle-hooks)
  - [Running the Extension](#running-the-extension)
  - [Register the Extension](#register-the-extension)
  - [Extension in Action](#extension-in-action)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
```

Just for consistency with the other docs / so we can re-gen with doctoc

Reviewer 2: + 

> This guide covers how one can use Cluster API's RuntimeSDK feature to hook into key lifecycle events of the Cluster.

=> 

> This guide covers how Cluster API's RuntimeSDK feature can be used to hook into key lifecycle events of the Cluster.

## Running the Extension

Firstly we will need a simple extension server that needs to run and be able to receive cluster lifecycle events. For this, lets create a deployment in the management cluster that will act as our extension server.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```bash
```
\+ other occurences

kubectl apply -f yamls/extension/test-extension-deployment.yaml
```

> Note that the YAML also contains the all the necessary resources like Service, Certificates, etc that will make this extension server reachable from within the management cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the YAML also contains all necessary resources like Service, Certificates, etc that will make this extension server reachable from within the management cluster.
```

Let's verify that the extension server is running:
```
kubectl get deployments -n test-extension-system
```
The output should resemble:
```
NAME                     READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
test-extension-manager   1/1     1            1           30s
```

## Register the Extension

> Now that we have a running extension server let's register it with ClusterAPI. This will inform ClusterAPI to call the extension server during key workload cluster lifecycle events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have a running extension server let's register it with Cluster API. This will inform Cluster API to call the extension server during key workload cluster lifecycle events.
```
nit (everywhere)

Let's first look at how the registration looks like:
```yaml
apiVersion: runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: ExtensionConfig
metadata:

>   name: printer-extension                       // Unique Registration Name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  name: printer-extension                      // Unique Registration Name
```
nit: I think that should align with the other comments below. Please check that the indentatin is aligned in the rendered markdown in GitHub

>   namespace: default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  annotations:
    runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io/inject-ca-from-secret: test-extension-system/test-extension-webhook-service-cert
spec:
  clientConfig:                                // Information to contact the extension server
    service:                                   // Reference to a service running in the management cluster
      name: test-extension-webhook-service
      namespace: test-extension-system
```

Let's register the extension using:
```
kubectl apply -f yamls/extension/test-extension-config.yaml
```

> Let us now verify that the extension is properly registered and the reachable:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let us now verify that the extension is properly registered and reachable:
```

```
kubectl get extensionconfig printer-extension -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions}'
```

The output should resemble:
```
[{"lastTransitionTime":"2022-10-12T04:55:44Z","status":"True","type":"Discovered"}]
```

> **Optional**  
> If you are curious take a look at `.status.handlers` in the printer-extension resource by doing kubectl get extensionconfig printer-extension -o jsonpath='{.status.handlers}'. This lists down all the lifecycle events the extension server would like to receive.

## Extension in Action

> Now that we have the extension serer running and registered with ClusterAPI let's see it in action. The extension server is configured to receive the following events (non-exhaustive list):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have the extension server running and registered with ClusterAPI let's see it in action. The extension server is configured to receive the following events (non-exhaustive list):
```
